
Ad Standards

In this fact sheet, we introduce Ad Standards, Australia's advertising complaints handling body. We outline how complaints can be made by Australian residents to the Ad Standards.
The Ad Standards manages the advertising industry’s system of national self-regulation. Its purpose is to provide a voice for the community regarding advertising across all media and to guide the advertising industry in maintaining responsible and honest advertising which upholds community standards and values. 
Legislation and Key Terms
Relevant Legislation, guidelines and codes: [List any pieces of legislation that are relevant to the work of the complaint body. Include a link to the legislation.] Example:

• AANA Code of Ethics
• AANA Food & Beverage Code
• AANA code for Advertising & Marketing Communications to Children
• AANA Environmental Claims Code
• AANA Wagering Advertising Code
Key terms: [Identify, list in alphabetical order, and define in accessible language any key terms that will be referred to throughout the factsheet.] Example:
Community Panel: A group of people from different backgrounds who review and assess complaints about ads made by the community.  
Complaint: An expression of dissatisfaction where a response or resolution is wanted, expected or required.
Complainant: A person who has made a complaint.


Step 1: What type of complaints can be made to Ad Standards? 


Complaints about advertising
The Australian advertising industry has written, and agreed to follow, rules for advertising. The rules reflect community standards and are designed to promote consumer confidence in the industry. If you believe an advertiser has failed to follow the rules you can make a complaint to Ad Standards. Below are types of complaints handled by Ad Standards
Sub-category
Example	
Advertising to children
AANA Code for Advertising & Marketing Communications to Children 
It is important that the ads aimed at children are not deceptive or inappropriate based on community standards. The Code sets standards related to: safety; sexualisation; social values; parental authority; food and beverages; alcohol and the presentation of factual information in advertisements aimed at children.   
Example: Luca is watching a children's TV show with ads for "Super Space Action Figures" during the commercial breaks. The ads show the action figures doing amazing things like flying and fighting aliens. However, when Luca get the toy, it can't perform any of the actions as advertised.
Luca’s parents complain to the advertising authority, saying the ads are misleading and create false expectations for children. 

Alcohol advertising
ABAC Responsible Alcohol Marketing Code  
AANA Code of Ethics
Alcohol must be marketed responsibly. Ads should not encourage unsafe and reckless consumption of alcohol or suggest its consumption can lead to success, create a significant change in mood or offer a therapeutic benefit. 
Example: Company A promotes their new alcoholic drink. It is in very similar packaging as a popular sports drink. It advertises that the drink will help with sport performance. Some people purchase the drink thinking it’s a regular sports drink and are surprised to discover it is alcohol. 

Discrimination
Section 2.1 of AANA Code of Ethics
Advertising is not allowed to discriminate or vilify a person or section of the community based on e.g. race, ethnicity, gender, age, sexual preference or disability.
Example: A clothing brand features a diverse group of models in their new ad campaign, celebrating diversity. A rival brand responds with an ad mocking the diverse models and uses stereotypes to mock and vilify the models’ differences. 
Distinguishable advertising
Section 2.7 of the AANA Code of Ethics
Advertisements should be easily recognisable and not be disguised as news, independent reviews, private blogs or user-generated content.
Example: A healthy eating magazine publishes an article promoting superfoods and promotes a specific protein powder as being one of the best superfoods on the market. Readers later discover that protein powder was a paid advertisement that was disguised as an independent review. 
Environmental claims
AANA Environmental Claims Code 
Advertisements need to be honest and factual about any environmental claims made about products and services.
Example: A cleaning company launches a new toilet cleaner that is 100% environmentally friendly without providing any evidence or certification to support this claim. 
Exploitative or degrading
Section 2.2 of the AANA Code of Ethics
Advertisements must not market a product or service in a sexually degrading or exploitative manner. Advertisements and must not use sex appeal when images of minors are used.
Example: A fashion brand launches a new underwear line using a number of underaged models who are posed in provocatively.

Food and beverage
AANA Food and Beverages Advertising Code 
Advertising for food and beverages must be in a manner that is legal, honest and factual and must be in line with health and safety standards.
Example: A cereal company released a new type of cereal that promises to help consumers lose weight and resolve their health issues. There is no scientific evidence to support these claims. 
Health and safety
Section 2.6 of the AANA Code of Ethics
Advertising must not encourage and promote behaviour which is unsafe, unhealthy and contrary to current community health and safety standards.
Example: An energy drink company promotes a viral challenge for their new product on social media. The challenge dares people to perform risky and potentially life-threatening stunts..
Health and safety
Section 2.5 of AANA Code of Ethics
Advertising must use appropriate language for the target audience and ensure that strong and obscene language is not used. Ads may use a sexualised double entendre or play on words if there is a second non-sexual meaning which can be understood by children.
Example: A bedding manufacturer launches an advertisement campaign for its new line of super soft mattresses. It features a very edgy tagline and sexually suggestive language to discuss the mattresses performance. It is clear that the advertisement is being intentionally provocative to the viewer. 

Misleading and deceptive advertising
Section 2.1 of the AANA Food and Beverages Code
Section 2.2 of the AANA Children Code
Section 1 of the AANA Environmental Claims Code
Advertising must not be misleading and deceptive in relation to marketing to children, food and beverages and environmental claims.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission as well as State and Territory consumer protection agencies also manage consumer complaints about general deceptive or misleading advertisements.   
Example: A snack company launches a campaign to promote a new snack for kids that is promised to be a healthy and wholesome. It is later discovered that the snack contains high levels of sugar and unhealthy additives.  
Motor vehicles
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries Voluntary Code of Practice for Motor Vehicle Advertising
Advertisements about motor vehicles must not encourage unsafe and reckless driving practices.
Example: A car manufacturer launches a new advertising campaign to promote its new sports car. It promises a powerful engine and super speed capabilities. The ad depicts the car being driven at extremely high speeds on public roads, expertly weaving around traffic and narrowly missing pedestrians. 

Sex, sexuality and nudity
Section 2.4 of the AANA Code of Ethics
Advertisements must treat sex, sexuality and nudity with sensitivity. The use of overtly sexual images should be avoided in public spaces where they are exposed to a broad audience. Subjects in the ads should not be overly sexualised especially where there is no relevance to the product.
Example: A chocolate company launches a provocative advertising campaign to promote its new product, a new chocolate bar. The ad features a high sexualised image of a woman covered in melted chocolate. The advertisement is displayed prominently on billboards across the city where people of all ages, including children, are exposed to it. Advocacy groups complain that the ad contains overtly sexual content that is irrelevant to the product. 

Violence
Section 2.3 of the AANA Code of Ethics
Violence should only be used in advertising where it can be justified. It must not be excessive or gratuitous. Violence includes both actual depictions of violence and threats or suggested violence, as well as the consequences of violence such as fear, pain and injury. 
Violence may be justified in community awareness campaigns, video games or films.
Example: A family is at the movies watching a children’s movie with their young children. A trailer for an upcoming action movie is featured and it includes intense combat, grotesque injuries and fear-inducing images. The family are concerned about their children’s exposure to the disturbing content.  
Wagering
AANA Wagering Advertising and Marking Communication Code 
Gambling ads should not be primarily directed to people underage, be in combination with alcohol consumption, imply the promise of winning; and suggest that gambling relieves personal or financial difficulty. 
Ad Standards codes do not apply to casino games or electronic gaming machines, keno, lotto and lottery products or trade promotions.
The Australian Communications and Media Authority is responsible for regulating gambling advertising that is shown during live sport and enforcing the ban on illegal online gambling services advertising.
Example: During a televised sports event, a gambling company airs an ad featuring a family, including young adults, making bets with their dad while drinking alcohol. The ad implies that they family have a high chance of winning and will resolve some of the family’s financial problems. 
In general, gambling advertisements are regulated by the Australian Communications and Media Authority. 

Step 2: What is the Jurisdiction of Ad Standards?

Jurisdiction
Description
Federal
Ad Standards administers a national system of advertising self-regulation. 
Geographical Scope
Any member of the community can submit a complaint about the content of any advertising produced in Australia or overseas.  
Time Limitations1
There are no specified timeframes for lodging a complaint with Ad Standards. However, you should raise your concerns as soon as possible so they can be addressed while the advertising is being broadcast. 
Exclusions2
Ad Standards cannot act on complaints about:
• product packaging or labels;
• corporate public affairs messages in media releases and other media statements, annual reports, statements on matters of public policy;
• ads on TV and radio which promote a program on the same channel or station the ad is broadcast on; 
• The timing or frequency of gambling advertisements;
• Therapeutic goods advertisements;
• Editorial content;
• The loudness or frequency of advertisements and; 
• political and election advertising.

Exercise of discretion 
Ad Standards may decide not to act on your complaint if it has already been assessed by the Ad Standards Community Panel or if it assesses that your complaint does not raise issues related to the advertising codes. 


Step 3: Who can you make a complaint about? 

Respondent
Description
Advertisers and brands

You can make a complaint about any advertiser or brand that targets Australians. The advertisement can be presented through any of the below formats:
• TV and radio ads
• Print ads
• Social media and online ads
• Billboards and posters
• Cinema ads
• Claims made on a company’s own website
• User generated content, such as by social influences or brand advocates. The advertiser must have a level of control over the content.
• Advertorials and sponsorship
Commercial emails. Direct mail, brochures and point of sale material
Exclusions
Ad Standards cannot handle complaint about therapeutic goods advertisers, or political or election advertising.

Step 4: Are you eligible to make a complaint? 

Eligibility
Description
Community members

To be eligible to make a complaint you must be an Australian community member. You can submit a complaint about the content of any advertising or marketing communications produced in Australia or overseas.  
You must have seen or heard the advertisement in its intended medium for Ad Standards to be able to consider your complaint. It is not sufficient to have been made aware of the ad by a friend, community/lobby group, news article, blog or social media post.
Industry competitor
Section 1, AANA, Code of Ethics
Australian business can make a complaint to Ad Standards about a competitor.  

Pre-requisite steps
There are no steps that you need to take before lodging your complaint with Ad Standards.

Can complaint be made on behalf of someone?
Complaints cannot be made on someone’s behalf. You must have seen or heard the advertisement. It is not sufficient to have been made aware of the ad by a friend, community/lobby group, news article, blog or social media post.
Exclusions
You cannot make a complaint if you are not an Australian community member.
