
Fair Work Commission (FWC)

In this fact sheet, we introduce the Fair Work Commission (FWC). We outline how complaints can be made by complainants to the FWC. 
The Fair Work Commission (FWC) deals with workplace disputes between workers (employees and contractors) and organisations in relation to employee dismissal, general protections, casual conversion, bullying, discrimination, modern awards and enterprise agreements. The functions of this workplace tribunal are set up under the Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth) (s 575), include dealing and preventing disputes, and promoting cooperative and productive workplace relations.
Legislation and Key Terms
Relevant Legislation:
• Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth)

Key terms: 
Arbitration: A process through which disputes are resolved by a neutral third party (the arbitrator), often resulting in binding decisions.
Complaint: An expression of dissatisfaction where a response or resolution is wanted, expected or required.
Lost remuneration: The income or compensation that you expected to receive but did not due to various circumstances, such as dismissal, injury, contractual breaches, or business disruptions, resulting in financial losses.
Procedural Fairness: Ensuring that a fair process is followed during employment-related actions, including providing an opportunity for employees to respond to allegations.
Reasonable Management Action: Actions taken by an employer that are considered reasonable and part of normal management responsibilities, not constituting bullying or adverse actions.


Step 1: What type of Complaints can be made to this body? 

Claims, disputes or issues
FWC resolves a variety of claims, disputes or issues raised by employees. Set out below are the most common types of claims made by employees to the FWC.
Sub-category[DM1]
Example	
Unfair dismissal claim 
Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth) 
ss 382 and 383 
You can lodge an unfair dismissal claim application with the FWC if you1 have been employed for the relevant minimum employment period2 and are dismissed improperly by your employer, or you think you were forced to resign.
Example #1: 
Jenny lodges an unfair dismissal claim after her employment of 2 years was terminated by her employer without warning on the basis of alleged underperformance.
Example #2:
Rob, an Award-covered employee, lodges an unfair dismissal claim after his employer makes his role redundant after 8 years without any prior consultation.
General Protections (Dismissal) claim
Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth)
ss 340, 341, 342, 351 and 352.
You can lodge a general protections (dismissal) claim application with the FWC if your employer takes adverse action against you by dismissing3 you because:
(1) of your workplace right(s)4; 
(2) of a discriminatory or prohibited reason5; and/or 
(3) you are, or were, temporarily absent from work due to illness or injury.
Example #1:
Kylie lodges a general protections dismissal application after her employer dismisses her while she is on sick leave for more than a week because of injuries she sustained from a car accident.
Example #2:
Jane is dismissed by her employer after she tells them that she is pregnant and lodges a general protections dismissal application.
General Protections (No Dismissal) claim
Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth)
ss 340, 341, 342, 346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 357, 358 and 359.
You can lodge a General Protections (no dismissal) application with the FWC if: 
(1) you face harmful or adverse action6 from your employer because of your workplace right(s), or because you are or were temporarily absent from work due to illness or injury or for a prohibited reason; or
(2) you face adverse action7 from your prospective employer because of a prohibited reason8.
Example #1:
David has the required skills and experience for a new position open within his employer’s business. David lodges a general protections (no dismissal) claim with the FWC after his employer refuses to consider him for the promotion because David has recently raised concerns about a colleague’s behaviour.
Example #2:
Holly was short-listed for a position open at a company, but was refused employment after she told the company during the final interview that she was pregnant. Holly lodges a general protections (no dismissal) claim with the FWC.
Stop Bullying application 
Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth) 
ss 789FC and 789FD
You may apply to the FWC to make a stop bullying order if you think or believe that you are being or have been bullied by an individual or a group of individuals at work.
Example #1:
Lina’s manager has been openly criticising and making insulting remarks regarding the quality of her work in front of her and her colleagues for over three months now. Lina lodges an application to the FWC for a stop bullying order.
Example #2:
Peter has been excluded by his team members from all relevant team meetings and work social events on multiple occasions. Peter’s lodges an application to the FWC for a stop bullying order.
Casual Conversion
Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth)
S 66M 
If you are a casual employee you may have the right to become a full-time or part-time employee. If your employer refuses your request to become a full-time or part-time employee, you may be able to refer the dispute to the FWC.
Example: 
Jenny is a casual employee but she has been consistently working more than 30 hours a week for over a year. Despite Jenny’s request, her employer has refused to convert her to a permanent part-time employee even though they still require Jenny to continue working the same hours. Jenny is unable to resolve the dispute with her employer and she refers the matter to the FWC.
Sexual Harassment dispute application
Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth) ss 527F and 527J
You can lodge a sexual harassment dispute application if you have been sexually harassed in connection with the workplace. This is an order to prevent future sexual harassment or to remedy past sexual harassment harm.
Example:
Over the last few weeks, Jake’s manager has been sending inappropriate text messages to him on his personal phone and asked Jake out for drinks several times despite Jake telling his manager that he was not interested. Jake lodges a sexual harassment dispute application with the FWC.
Step 2: What is the Jurisdiction of the complaints body?
Jurisdiction
Description
Disputes
Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth) ss 13 and 14

The FWC has powers to deal with disputes and issues between national system employees9 and national system employers who are covered by the Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth). These powers include, for example, dealing with disputes and issues in relation to unfair dismissal, general protections, casual conversation, bullying, and sexual harassment.
Geographical Scope
The FWC has powers to deal with specific disputes and issues involving all national system employers operating in Australia and may have jurisdiction to deal with disputes concerning national system employers who are operating in a foreign country who engage employees to perform work in Australia.
Time Limitations
Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth) ss 366, 394 and 527G 
The FWC has powers to deal with and/or hear complaints that are made within the prescribed time limits for each type of claim.
These are the main complaint type time limitations:
Unfair Dismissal Application and General Protections (Dismissal) Application: You must make the application within 21 days after the date the termination of your employment or dismissal took effect. If there are exceptional circumstances10, the FWC may accept your application after the lapse of 21 days.
General Protections (No Dismissal) Application: You can make the application within six years of the adverse action.
Casual Conversion Dispute Application: You can make an application at any time during your employment after the first 12 months and 21 days11 of your employment.
Stop Bullying Application: You can make an application at any time while you are employed with your employer.
Sexual Harassment Dispute Application: You must make an application within 24 months of the alleged sexual harassment.
Exclusions

The FWC will not have jurisdiction to deal with a complaint or issues that do not involve a national system employer as defined under the Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth).
The FWC cannot handle complaints about state public sector or local government employment.
The FWC only has the power to deal with complaints or issues under the Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth). Sometimes other Federal, State or Territory laws may cover your issue or complaint. 
For example, complaints in relation to work health and safety are referred to the State or Territory health and safety regulator or body.
Step 3: Who can you make a complaint against?
Respondent
Description
Unfair Dismissal claim
You can only lodge an Unfair Dismissal claim against your ex-employer (who has dismissed you).
General Protections (Dismissal) Application
You can only make a General Protections (Dismissal) claim against your ex-employer.
General Protections (No Dismissal) Application
You can lodge a General Protections (No Dismissal) application against your current employer or a prospective employer where you had applied for a job. You can also lodge a General Protections claim against actions of an individual employee of your current employer.
Casual Conversion dispute application
You can refer a Casual Conversion dispute to FWC against your current employer.
Stop Bullying Application 
You can lodge a Stop Bullying application to the FWC in respect of an individual or group of individuals working for your employer or engager.
Sexual Harassment Dispute Application
You can lodge a Sexual Harassment Dispute application to the FWC against your employer or engager and/or an individual or group of individuals working for your employer or engager.
Exclusions
You cannot make a complaint about your state public sector or local government employer or colleagues.
Step 4: Are you eligible to make a complaint?
Eligibility
Description
Unfair Dismissal Application
Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth) s 382
You are eligible to make an Unfair Dismissal application if you:
(1) are a national system employee12 who has been dismissed or forced to resign after completing the minimum period of employment; and
(2) one or more of the following circumstances apply to you:
• you earn an annual salary which is less than the high income threshold13; or
• a modern award14 applies to your employment; or
• an enterprise agreement15 applies to your employment. 
General Protections (Dismissal) Application
Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth) ss 340, 351, and 352. 
You can make a General Protections (Dismissal) application if you are a national system employee and you were dismissed or forced to resign by your employer because of:
(1) your workplace right(s); and/or
(2) a discriminatory or prohibited reason; and/or 
(3) your temporary absence from work due to illness or injury.
General Protections (No Dismissal) Application 
Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth) ss 340 and 351. 
You can make a General Protections (No Dismissal) application if you are a national system employee and your employer took adverse action against you because of your:
(1) your workplace right(s); and/or
(2) a discriminatory or prohibited reason.
Stop Bullying application
Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth)          s 789FC
If you are an employee who performs work as an employee, a contractor, a subcontractor, an outworker, an apprentice, a trainee, a student gaining work experience or a volunteer, you can lodge an application for a FWC order to stop bullying by another worker or group of workers employed or engaged with your employer or engager.
Sexual Harassment dispute application
Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth)          s 527F
If you are a worker who performs work as an employee, a contractor, a subcontractor, an outworker, an apprentice, a trainee, a student gaining work experience or a volunteer, you can lodge an application for the FWC to deal with a Sexual Harassment dispute in respect of the conduct of another worker and/or a ‘person conducting a business or undertaking’16 which includes your employer or engager.
Exclusions
You cannot make a complaint if you work for the state public sector or a local government.
