
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia 

In this fact sheet, we introduce the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia and outline how people can make complaints to it. 
The Federal Circuit Court and Family Court of Australia (the Court) can hear a wide range of federal law matters including family law, migration law, administrative law, consumer law, human rights, intellectual property and privacy. 
The Court also has a role in handling complaints about the conduct of its registry staff and judges. The 3 types of complaints handled by the Court are: 
1. Complaints about registry staff and services
2. Complaints about judges
3. Complaints about a delay in the delivery of a judgment.
Legislation and Key Terms
Relevant Legislation: Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia

Key terms: 
Complaint: An expression of dissatisfaction where a response or resolution is wanted, expected or required.
Judicial Functions: The tasks that judges and the legal system perform, like making decisions, interpreting laws, and running court proceedings.
Registry Staff: Employees responsible for record-keeping and administrative support in legal or judicial settings.

Step 1: What type of Complaints can be made to this body? 
The Court can handle 3 types of complaints: 
1. Complaints about registry staff and services
2. Complaints about judges
3. Complaints about a delay in the delivery of a judgment.
Sub-category
Example	
Complaints about Court Registry staff and services

You can make a complaint about the registry or administrative staff of the Court if they do not provide you with helpful, courteous, prompt and efficient service. Court registry and administrative services you may have a complaint about could include, but are not limited to:
• Information about what forms you may need to file1.
• Checking your paperwork is complete and includes all requirements.
• Pointing you in the right direction for further information.
• Explaining how the Court works.
• Telling you about how your case will be managed at each stage, from filing to hearing or trial.
• Providing you with your hearing date, time and location.
• Advising you on the status of your matter.
• Helping you register for and use the Commonwealth Courts Portal2 to access your court file online, view upcoming court events and download orders.
• Advising you on how to find an interpreter for your hearing.
• Informing you about the Court’s policy on issues of personal safety.
• Referring you to external services that help people with legal issues.
• Helping you register for and use eLodgment3– to file documents electronically.
Court registry and administrative staff are not responsible for:
• Giving you legal advice or telling you what to say in court.
• Advising you what to write in your court documents or confirming whether you have supplied enough information.
• Recommending a lawyer to act on your behalf.
• Tell you what the outcome of the Court’s decision might be, or interpreting order that are made in your case.
• Enforcing a court order, but they can advise how you can apply to do this.
Example: Jade is a self-litigant. They asked the Registry staff to check if they had signed a court form correctly before lodgement. The Registry staff told Jade to hire a lawyer to check the document because they were too busy. 
Example: Jack asked Registry staff if an interpreter could be arranged for their Family Law hearing. Jack was told was told they would need to make their own arrangements and pay for a private interpreter.

Complaints about the conduct of judges

You can complain about the conduct of a judge of the FCA in connection with a case before the court or their performance of judicial functions.
Complaints can include raising concerns that a judge may lack capacity to perform their role.
Example: Ivana made a complaint about a Judge making several transphobic comments about their appearance during the hearing of their case.  
Example: Peter was concerned that during his trial, the judge appeared confused and kept calling the prosecutor by the wrong name.
Complaints about a delay in delivery of a judgment
You can make a complaint if you believe a judge or a registrar is taking an unreasonable amount of time to deliver a judgment. 
The Court aims to deliver judgments within three months of the last hearing day of a hearing.
Example: The Minister for Immigration refused an application for Ahmad to be granted a protection visa. Ahmad appealed the decision at Court and has been waiting 7 months for the decision to be delivered.  
Step 2: What is the Jurisdiction of the complaints body? (General Jurisdiction)
Jurisdiction
Description
Federal

The Court can handle complaints under the law of the Commonwealth.


Geographical Scope

You can complain about registry staff and judges of the Court regardless of the State or Territory you, or they, are in.  
Time Limitations

Complaints about registry staff and services
You can make a complaint about registry staff and services at any time. However, you should try to lodge your complaint as soon as possible. The more time that passes, the harder it can be to substantiate your complaint. 
Complaints about the conduct of judges
You can make a complaint about the conduct of a judge at any time. However, the court may decide not to act on complaints about conduct that occurred a long time ago. 
Complaints about a delay in delivery of a judgment
If a judgment has been reserved by a judge and is not delivered within the six months of a trial finishing, you can make a complaint about the delay.  
If a judgement has been reserved by a registrar and is not delivered within 3 months, you can make a complaint about the delay.
Exclusions

The Court cannot handle complaints about:
• How your case is being run, including any: Orders that have been made or; decisions that you think were incorrect or unfair. Any concerns about the running of your case should be raised with your lawyer or the judge at the time.
• The actions or decisions of solicitors, barristers or Independent Children’s Lawyers. Each State and Territory has its specialist bodies for handling complaints about lawyers.  
• Family consultants or other individuals and experts involved in court proceedings. Any concerns about the evidence provided by a family consultant or other individual should be raised under cross-examination. 
• Criminal and corruption matters. The police and the National Anti-Corruption Commission are responsible for investigating allegations of criminal and corrupt conduct.
Exercise of discretion 
Your complaint may be dismissed if the Court assesses it as being:
• Frivolous, vexatious or not in good faith;
• Misconceived
• About a trivial matter
• About something that occurred too long ago to justify investigation
• About the exercise of a judicial function that was capable of appeal or review; or
• Capable of being resolved by another means 
• About a person who is no longer a judge.

Step 3: Who can you make a complaint against? 
Respondent
Description
Registry and administrative staff and services
You can complain about registry staff who are responsible for the administrative polices and functions of the Court. 
You can also complain about the Courts corporate services including its communications, finance, human resources, information technology, procurement and property, risk oversight and statistics teams.
Judges 
 You can complaint about a judge of the Court
Exercise of discretion 
The Court cannot act on complaints about conduct that occurred prior to someone being appointed as a judge, unless the conduct, if substantiated, could justify consideration of them being removed from the bench.

Step 4: Are you eligible to make a complaint? 
Eligibility
Description
Who can make a complaint?
Anyone can make a complaint about the conduct and services of the Court registry and administrative staff, or a judge. 
You do not need to be a party to a case before the court.
Pre-requisite steps
You do not need to take any steps before lodging a complaint. 
Can complaints be made on behalf of someone?
You can make a complaint on someone’s behalf, and someone can make a complaint on your behalf, such as your solicitor or barrister, or a friend or family member. 
Additional information you need to know
There is no cost for lodging a complaint. 
You do not need a lawyer to lodge a complaint, but you can seek legal advice at any time. 
