
Federal Court of Australia

In this fact sheet, we introduce the Federal Court of Australia and outline how complaints can be made by people to it. 
The Federal Court of Australia (FCA) is a superior court with jurisdiction to hear almost all civil matters arising under Australian federal law as well as some summary and indictable criminal matters. The Federal Court also has an appellate jurisdiction. For example, it hears appeals from decisions of single judges of the Federal Court and from the Federal Circuit and Family Court in non-family law matters.
The FCA also has a role in handling complaints about the conduct of its registry staff and judges. The 3 types of complaints handled by the FCA are: 
1. Complaints about registry staff and services
2. Complaints about judges
3. Complaints about a delay in the delivery of a judgment.
Legislation and Key Terms
Relevant Legislation:
• Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
• Federal Court Rules 2011

Key terms: 
Complaint: An expression of dissatisfaction where a response or resolution is wanted, expected or required.
Judicial Functions: The tasks that judges and the legal system perform, like making decisions, interpreting laws, and running court proceedings.
Registry Staff: Employees responsible for record-keeping and administrative support in legal or judicial settings.

Step 1: What type of Complaints can be made to this body? 

The FCA can handle 3 types of complaints: 
1. Complaints about Registry staff and services
2. Complaints about judges
3. Complaints about a delay in delivery of a judgment.
Sub-category
Example	
Complaints about Court Registry staff and services

You can make a complaint about the registry or administrative staff of the FCA failing to provide prompt, courteous and effective services.1 FCA registry and administrative services that you may have a complaint about include, but are not limited to:
• General explanations or answers given to questions about how the FCA works, its practices and procedures;
• Information given about what Court forms you may need to use;
• Checking forms and other Court documents for completeness, for example, checking for signatures and attachments; 
• Information given about:
o how you can apply for an exemption to pay Court fees;2 
o how your case will be managed and the steps along the way;
o Court lists and how to organise for your case to be listed before the Court; 
o mediation;
o interpreters;
o free or low cost legal assistance.3
FCA registry and administrative staff are not responsible for:
• Giving you legal advice or telling your what to say in court
• Advising you what to write in your court documents, what to say in them, or confirming whether you have supplied enough information.
• Recommending a lawyer to act on your behalf;
• Telling you what to say in Court; 
• Telling you what the decision of the Court will be;
• Explaining orders made by a Judge or Judicial Registrar.

Example: Maria attended the FCA Court Registry to ask about how to file a defence. She found the Registry staff unhelpful and rude.
Example: Grant asked the Registry staff which Court form he should use when preparing a defence. The staff member told him he was too busy to assist and that he could ‘look it up on the internet’.

Complaints about judges

You can complain about the conduct of a judge of the FCA in connection with a case before the court or their performance of judicial functions. Complaints can include raising concerns that a judge may lack capacity to perform their role.
Example: Destina made a complaint about a judge making racist and sexist remarks during the hearing of her case.
Complaints about a delay in the delivery of a judgment
You can make a complaint if you believe it is taking an unreasonable amount of time for a judgment to be delivered.
The FCA aims to deliver judgments within 3 months of the last day of a hearing. 
Example: Jennifer was charged with a serious criminal offence. The trial finished 7 months ago and she has been waiting in gaol since then for the judgment.
Step 2: What is the Jurisdiction of the complaints body? (General Jurisdiction)
Jurisdiction
Description
Federal

The FCA can handle complaints under the law of the Commonwealth.


Geographical Scope

You can complain about registry staff and judges of the FCA regardless of the State or Territory you, or they are in.  
Time Limitations4

Complaints about registry staff and services
You can make a complaint about registry staff and services at any time. However, you should try to lodge your complaint as soon as possible. The more time that passes, the harder it can be to substantiate your complaint. 
Complaints about the conduct of judges
You can make a complaint about the conduct of a judge at any time. However, the court may decide not to act on complaints about conduct that occurred a long time ago. 
Complaints about a delay in delivery of a judgment
You can make a complaint about a delay in receiving a judgment at any time. However, as the court aims to deliver judgments within 3 months, unless there are special circumstances (for example if a party to the proceedings is dying or an urgent injunction is required) you should wait for that time to pass before raising a complaint.
Exclusions5

The FCA cannot handle complaints about:
• How your case is being run, including any: Orders that have been made or; decisions that you think were incorrect or unfair. Any concerns about the running of your case should be raised with your lawyer or the judge at the time.
• The actions or decisions of solicitors or barristers. Each State and Territory has its specialist bodies for handling complaints about lawyers.  
• Experts or individuals involved in court proceedings. Any concerns about the evidence provided by someone should be raised under cross-examination. 
• The conduct of judges in their personal capacity.
• Criminal and corruption matters. The police and the National Anti-Corruption Commission are responsible for investigating allegations of criminal and corrupt conduct.
Exercise of discretion 
Your complaint may be dismissed if the Court assesses it as being:
• Frivolous, vexatious or not in good faith;
• Misconceived
• About a trivial matter
• About something that occurred too long ago to justify investigation
• About the exercise of a judicial function that was capable of appeal or review; or
• Capable of being resolved by another means 
• About a person who is no longer a judge.
Step 3: Who can you make a complaint against? (Jurisdiction: Type of Respondents, this may include individuals, bodies or groups etc)

Respondent
Description
Registry and administrative staff and services
You can complain about registry staff who are responsible for the administrative polices and functions of the FCA. 
You can also complain about the FCA corporate services including its communications, finance, human resources, information technology, procurement and property, risk oversight and statistics teams.
Judges 
You can complaint about a judge of the FCA.
Exclusions

The FCA cannot act on complaints about conduct that occurred prior to someone being appointed as a judge, unless the conduct, if substantiated, could justify consideration of their removal from the bench.
Step 4: Are you eligible to make a complaint? (Jurisdiction: Complainant’s Eligibility)
Eligibility
Description
Who can make a complaint?
Anyone can make a complaint about the conduct and services of the Court registry and administrative staff, or a judge. 
You do not need to be a party to a case before the court.

Pre-requisite steps

You do not need to take any steps before lodging a complaint. 
Can complaints be made on behalf of someone?
You can make a complaint on someone’s behalf, and someone can make a complaint on your behalf, such as your solicitor or barrister, or a friend or family member.
Additional information you need to know
There is no cost for lodging a complaint. 
You do not need a lawyer to lodge a complaint, but you can seek legal advice at any time. 
