
NDIS QUALITY AND SAFEGUARDS COMMISSION (NDIS COMMISSION)

In this fact sheet, we introduce the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission (NDIS Commission). The NDIS Commission hears complaints about the quality and standard of services or supports, the safety of services or supports provided and how a NDIS provider has managed a previous complaint about services or supports provided
The National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) supports people who have a permanent and significant disability which affects their ability to take part in everyday activities. 
It can help you identify the supports and services you might need to help you achieve your goals and to reduce the impact of your disability. The NDIS aims to help you choose and control the things you need which might include:
• gaining greater independence;
• becoming involved in your community;
• accessing education, employment and healthcare; and
• your general wellbeing.  
Legislation and Key Terms
Relevant Legislation: 
• National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013
• National Disability Insurance Scheme (Complaints Management and Resolution) Rules 2018
• National Disability Insurance Scheme (Incident Management and Reportable Incidents) Rules 2018

Key terms: Below are key terms that appear throughout this factsheet and their meaning.
Advocate: Someone who speaks up for you if you need it.
Complainant: A person who has made a complaint.
Complaint: An expression of dissatisfaction where a response or resolution is wanted, expected or required.
Compliance action: Guides to make sure people follow the rules.
Conciliation: A meeting where people talk and attempt to agree on how to solve a problem.
NDIS: The National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) is an Australian government program that provides funding for tailored support and services to individuals with disabilities.
Provider: A person or organization that gives the help or support you need.
Quality and Safeguards: Guides to make sure the help and support you need is safe and adequate.
Remedial action: Steps taken to make a situation better or fix an issue.

Step 1: What type of Complaints can be made to this body? 

NDIS Services and Support
Anyone can make a complaint to the NDIS Commission about the quality and safety of NDIS services and support provided by a NDIS provider.
Sub-category
Example	
NDIS services or supports not provided in a safe and respectful way

You have the rights to be treated fairly and equally, with safety and respect. 
Jane’s occupational therapist does not provide a physically safe space when providing treatment. The room is cluttered, and they cannot move around without bumping into or tripping over things.
NDIS services or supports that were not delivered to an appropriate standard1
You have the right to get good quality services that meet your needs and have control over the services and supports you receive. 
Adrian’s speech therapist begins to offer Adrian support in areas of support they are not qualified or trained to offer support in, instead of focusing on speech.
How an NDIS provider has managed a complaint about services or supports provided to an NDIS participant
You can make a complaint to the NDIS Commission about how a NDIS provider has dealt with a complaint you have made to them.
Tim makes a complaint to their NDIS provider about services provided to them which is ignored, and no steps are taken to discuss or rectify the issue. Tim can discuss the issue with the NDIS Commission to resolve their complaint.
NDIS provider’s treatment of an advocate or carer of NDIS participant.
You can make a complaint to the NDIS Commission about how a NDIS provider has responded to an advocate or carer of a NDIS participant. 
Karen is the carer of a child who is a NDIS participant and when they arrive for their child’s speech therapist appointment, their child’s speech therapist makes disparaging remarks about their ethnicity or culture.
	
Exclusions
You cannot make a complaint about decisions regarding:
• Access to the NDIS 
• NDIS participant plans that have been approved
Step 2: What is the Jurisdiction of the complaints body?
Jurisdiction
Description
Federal2

The NDIS Commission can hear complaints from anywhere in Australia.

Geographical Scope

You can make a complaint to the NDIS Commission if the conduct you are complaining about occurred in Australia by a NDIS provider. 
Time Limitations

There are no specified time limits for when you can make a complaint. 
Exclusions

You cannot make a complaint to the NDIS Commission about: 
• Actions taken by the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA), including decisions about eligibility, funding and supports included in a participant’s plan.
• Disability services or supports provided by an organisation which is not a NDIS provider, for example, health, education, or transport services.
• Decisions of courts, tribunals, or coroners.
Step 3: Who can you make a complaint against?
Respondent
Description
NDIS Service Providers
You can make a complaint to the NDIS Commission about an individual or an organisation providing NDIS services.
Exclusions

The NDIS Commission cannot deal with complaints about non-funded services, such as in-kind supports provided by a NDIS provider.
Step 4: Are you eligible to make a complaint?
Eligibility
Description
Who can make a complaint?
Anyone can make a complaint to the NDIS Commission about support and services provided by a NDIS provider. 
This includes people with disability, their families, friends, carers, advocates or guardians, workers or volunteers of a NDIS provider or any other person.
Have you raised your complaint with the NDIS Service provider first?
The NDIS Commission recommends attempting to resolve the complaint by yourself at first instance by speaking to the NDIS provider that you want to make a complaint about. 
You do not need to speak to the NDIS provider before you make a complaint to the NDIS Commission. 
Can complaints be made on behalf of someone?

Yes, complaints can be made on behalf of someone. Anyone, including family members, friends, carers, advocates, or guardians, can make a complaint to the NDIS Commission on behalf of a person with a disability who is affected by the issue raised in the complaint.
Time Limits
No time limits are outlined.
