
New South Wales Police Force

WARNING: Anything you include in a complaint may be used against you in other legal proceedings, e.g. if you are suing for financial compensation. If you are currently involved in legal action, do not proceed with a complaint before you have received advice from a suitably qualified lawyer.
There may be more than one complaint pathway available to you. In some cases, your initial choice may affect future options available to you. See below for further details.
In this fact sheet, we introduce the New South Wales Police Force (NSW Police Force). We outline how complaints can be made by you as a member of the public or as a NSW Police Force employee about the NSW Police Force. The purpose of this fact sheet is to give general introductory information about the NSW Police Force and the complaints process. It does not contain legal advice.
The NSW Police Force investigates crimes that fall within the law-making responsibilities of the NSW government. You can make a complaint about the NSW Police Force or its employees to the NSW Commissioner of Police (Commissioner). You can complain about misconduct or maladministration by the NSW Police Force.
Step 1: What type of Complaints can be made to this body? 

Misconduct
Sub-category
Example	
Police Misconduct
Police Act 1990 (NSW) s 121; Law Enforcement Conduct Commission Act 2016 (NSW) s 9(1).
Any misconduct by a police officer including an action or inaction. It does not matter whether or not:
- it also involves participants who are not police officers,
- it occurs while the police officer is officially on duty, or
- it occurred outside NSW or Australia.
Police misconduct can be conduct which occurred at any time.
Examples: A police officer engaging in conduct that constitutes criminal offence, corrupt conduct, or unlawful conduct (not being a criminal offence or corrupt conduct) such as a police officer using excessive force against you.
Administrative employee misconduct
Police Act 1990 (NSW) s 121; Law Enforcement Conduct Commission Act 2016 (NSW) s 9(2).
Any misconduct by an administrative employee including an action or inaction. It does not matter whether or not:
- it also involves participants who are not administrative employees,
- it occurs while the administrative employee is officially on duty, or
- it occurred outside NSW or Australia.
Administrative employee misconduct can be conduct which occurred at any time.
Example: An administrative employee accepting a bribe.
Serious misconduct
Police Act 1990 (NSW) s 121; Law Enforcement Conduct Commission Act 2016 (NSW) s 10.
Serious misconduct can fall into 3 categories:
- Category 1: Conduct of a police officer, administrative employee or Crime Commission officer that could result in prosecution of the officer or employee for a serious offence or serious disciplinary action against the officer or employee for a disciplinary infringement.
serious offence means a serious indictable offence and includes an offence committed elsewhere than in New South Wales that, if committed in New South Wales, would be a serious indictable offence.
serious disciplinary action against an officer or employee means terminating the employment, demoting or reducing the rank, classification or grade of the office or position held by the officer or employee or reducing the remuneration payable to the officer or employee. 
- Category 2: A pattern of officer misconduct, officer maladministration or agency maladministration carried out on more than one occasion, or that involves more than one person, that is indicative of systemic issues that could damage the integrity and reputation of the NSW Police Force or the Crime Commission.
- Category 3: Corrupt conduct of a police officer, administrative employee or Crime Commission officer.
What is NOT included? 

Matters of unsatisfactory customer service do not amount to misconduct.
e.g. Lawful action by a NSW police officer that did not achieve an outcome you wanted.

Maladministration
Sub-category
Example	
Agency Maladministration
s 11(1) Law Enforcement Conduct Commission Act 2016 (NSW); s 121 Police Act 1990 (NSW)
Any conduct (by way of action or inaction) of the NSW Police Force or the Crime Commission:
- that is unlawful (i.e., constitutes an offence or us corrupt conduct / otherwise unlawful), or
- that, although not unlawful:
o is unreasonable, unjust, oppressive or improperly discriminatory in its effect, or
o arises, wholly or in part, from improper motives, or
o arises, wholly or in part, from a decision that has taken irrelevant matters into consideration, or
o arises, wholly or in part, from a mistake of law or fact, or
o is conduct of a kind for which reasons should have (but have not) been given, or
- that is engaged in according to a law or practice which itself is or may be unreasonable, unjust, oppressive or improperly discriminatory in effect. 
Agency maladministration is serious maladministration if the conduct involved is unlawful (i.e., constitutes an offence or is corrupt conduct / otherwise unlawful).
Note: Certain conduct is excluded. See below at ‘What is NOT included?’ 
Officer Maladministration
s 11(2) Law Enforcement Conduct Commission Act 2016 (NSW); s 121 Police Act 1990 (NSW)
Any conduct (by way of action or inaction) of a police officer, administrative employee or Crime Commission officer that, although it is not unlawful (that is, does not constitute an offence or corrupt conduct):
- is unreasonable, unjust, oppressive or improperly discriminatory in its effect, or
- arises, wholly or in part, from improper motives, or
- arises, wholly or in part, from a decision that has taken irrelevant matters into consideration, or
- arises, wholly or in part, from a mistake of law or fact, or
- is conduct of a kind for which reasons should have (but have not) been given.
Officer maladministration is serious maladministration if the conduct involved is of a serious nature and, although it is not unlawful:
- is unreasonable, unjust, oppressive, or improperly discriminatory in its effect, or
- arises wholly or in part from improper motives.
E.g. A police officer arresting a person because of that person’s ethnicity as perceived by the officer, as opposed to legitimate reasons.
Step 2: What is the Jurisdiction of the complaints body? (General Jurisdiction)
Jurisdiction
Description
New South Wales
Police Act 1990 (NSW) s 121 and 124; Law Enforcement Conduct and Commission Act 2016 (NSW) s 4.
The Commissioner will only hear complaints about: 
- NSW Police Officers,
- Administrative employees (any member of the NSW Police Force other than a police officer), and
- The NSW Police Force.
Geographical Scope
Police Act 1990 (NSW) s 121 and 124; Law Enforcement Conduct and Commission Act 2016 (NSW) s 4.
The Commissioner will only hear complaints that relate to New South Wales law enforcement.
Time Limitations

None.
Exclusions
Police Act 1990 (NSW) s 124(3).
Complaining to the Commissioner does not affect any other right you have to complain about the conduct of  a police officer,  an administrative employee, or the NSW Police force.
Additional information you need to know
The Commissioner has a duty to report officer misconduct to the Crime Commission if they suspect on reasonable grounds that there is officer misconduct or maladministration.


Step 3: Who can you make a complaint against? (Jurisdiction: Type of Respondents)
Respondent
Description
Individuals
Police Act 1990 (NSW) ss 121(2) and 124.
You can make a complaint against:
- individual NSW Police officers, and
- individual administrative officers. 
Complaints can be made about the conduct of an individual, even though they are no longer employed as a police officer or administrative employee (but only in relation to conduct occurring while they held that role). 
NSW Police Force
Police Act 1990 (NSW) s 124.
You can make a complaint against the NSW Police Force as an entity.
Exclusions

 No exclusions found.
Additional information you need to know

Step 4: Are you eligible to make a complaint? (Jurisdiction: Complainant’s Eligibility)
Eligibility
Description
Who can complain?
Police Act 1990 (NSW) ss 124 and s 127A
Any person can make a complaint to the Commissioner.
A member of Parliament can also make a complaint on your behalf if they have your consent in writing.
Who cannot make a complaint?

There appear to be no exclusions.
Time Limits
There appears to be no time limit for lodging a complaint.
Exclusions
There appear to be no exclusions for lodging a complaint.
Additional information you need to know
False complaint
Police Act 1990 (NSW) s 167A; Crimes Act 1900 (NSW) s 314.
Prisoner complaint
Police Act 1990 (NSW) s 127(1).
Offence to make a false complaint
It is an offence to knowingly make a false complaint or to give false or misleading information during the investigation of a complaint. This is punishable by up to 12 months’ imprisonment.
It is also an offence if you falsely accuse a person of a crime (up to 7 years imprisonment).

Prisoners can make a complaint
A prisoner may submit a complaint against the NSW Police Force. In these circumstances, the prison officer must take all steps necessary to facilitate the making of the complaint, and immediately send, unopened, any written matter addressed to a police officer (whether by name or reference to an office held by that officer), the Commissioner (whether by name or reference to that office) or to the Law Enforcement Conduct Commission (LECC) to that addressee.
