
NSW Ombudsman

In this fact sheet, we introduce the NSW Ombudsman. We outline how complaints can be made by people to the NSW Ombudsman. 
The NSW Ombudsman is an impartial and independent agency. It was established to watch over NSW public authorities, local councils and some community service providers, to ensure they are doing their jobs properly. The NSW Ombudsman’s vision is that everyone receives the right services and fair treatment.
Legislation and Key Terms
Relevant Legislation: Below are links to legislation that is relevant to the NSW Ombudsman’s complaint handling work. 
• Ombudsman Act 1974 (NSW) 
• Community Services (Complaints, Reviews and Monitoring) Act 1993 (NSW)
• Public Interest Disclosures Act 2022 (NSW)
• Judicial Officers Act 1986 (NSW)
• Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009 (NSW)
Key Terms: Below are key terms that appear throughout this factsheet and their meaning.
Administrative conduct: What a public authority does, or does not do, and the decisions it makes, when performing its work.

Community service provider: The Department of Communities and Justice (DCJ) and private organisations funded by DCJ to provide services to support the welfare of children, young people, families and people at risk of homelessness.

Complaint: An expression of dissatisfaction where a response or resolution is wanted, expected or required.
Complainant: A person who has made a complaint.
Public authority: Bodies or individuals that are authorised to perform a role on behalf of the government. 

Step 1: What type of Complaints can be made to this body? 

Complaints can be made about the conduct of NSW public authorities and some community service providers. The NSW Ombudsman focuses on complaints about, but not limited to:
Sub-category
Example	
Dishonest, unfair or unreasonable behaviour
Public authorities should be fair and reasonable when dealing with you.  
• Joan was issued with a speeding fine. The speed camera showed a car with Victorian license plates but Joan’s car is registered in NSW. She explained this when she applied for a, internal review of the fine but was told it didn’t matter, she still had to pay.
• Bruce is in custody. He complains that excessive force was used on him by guards when they suspected he was carrying a weapon.
• Amy is a single parent of a son with a serious medical problem. It is important that he maintains good personal hygiene. Council has restricted the water on Amy’s property because she has fallen behind on her council rates. The reduced water flow means her son cannot take a shower. Amy is worried that he if can’t stay clean he will get sick.
Lack of transparency with a decision
Where possible public authorities should provide you with information to help you to understand a decision they have made.
• Jenny complained to council about her neighbour’s dog repeatedly escaping from their property. She believes the dog is dangerous. Council told her they won’t do anything about it but she doesn’t understand why.
• Five years ago, Gwen had her son removed from her and placed in foster care. She would like him to be returned to her care. Gwen has a second child, an 18-month-old daughter. No concerns have been raised about her daughter’s wellbeing. Gwen doesn’t understand why her daughter can stay with her, but her son has to be in foster care.
Failure to reply to correspondence
Public authorities should reply to you, unless there is a good reason not to.
• Riley lives in a public housing property. His belongings were accidentally damaged by maintenance workers when they repaired a whole in the ceiling. He was told that if he emailed details of the damaged items he would be reimbursed. Riley sent the details and asked when he will receive payment, but has not received a response.  
Unfair or flawed policies or procedures
The policies and procedures of a public authority should be fair and reasonable, and should be followed, unless there is a good reason not to. 
• Sue is in custody. She has been convicted on some charges but not others. She understands that unconvicted inmates can call their lawyer for free, but when she tried calling hers, she had to pay. She thinks the record of her having some convictions is to blame and doesn’t think this is fair.    
• Steve is in custody. He was disciplined for failing a urinalysis test. He says the procedure for taking the sample was not correctly followed and it was not tested within 7 days, as required.
Unreasonable delays
Public authorities should perform their work as promptly as possible and without unnecessary delay.
• Tim has an acquired brain injury. He has been placed under a financial management order which means a trustee manages all of his finances. Tim’s investment property has been vacant for the last year while his trustee decides whether to rent it out or renovate it. During this time no income has been generated from the property. Tim needs the rental income to pay for his medical expenses. 
• Jenny has Alzheimer's. The Public Guardian has been appointed to make lifestyle decisions for her, including where she lives. Jenny has been living in a nursing home but has been asking her guardian for the last 8 months but wants to move back home. The case worker from the Public Guardian keeps telling Jenny she is thinking about it. Until her case worker decides, Jenny has to stay in the nursing home and has no right of appeal.
Failure to act on complaints 
Public authorities should value your feedback and handle your complaint in accordance with their complaint handling policies and procedures.
• Kevin and his daughter live in public housing. They have lodged multiple complaints about being overcharged rent but have not received a response. They are falling further and further into debt. 
• Three months ago, Joanne lodged a complaint about the service she received from a government department. She has not been contacted about her complainant since. 
Step 2: What is the Jurisdiction of the complaints body? 
Jurisdiction
Description
State
The NSW Ombudsman has powers to hear complaints under the law of NSW.
Geographical Scope
The NSW Ombudsman has the power to act on complaints about the conduct of NSW public authorities and community service providers, regardless of where the conduct takes place, including if it occurs in another state.
Time Limitations1
The NSW Ombudsman cannot act on complaints about conduct:
• that took place before 18 October 1973
• that took place between 18 October 1973 and 18 October 1974 but was not complained about until 18 October 1975
• of a local government authority that took place prior to 13 October 1976.
Exclusions





























The NSW Ombudsman is prevented or “excluded” from investigating 22 types of conduct by public authorities. These exclusions are listed in Schedule 1 of the Ombudsman Act 1974.2 
Some of the exclusions stop the NSW Ombudsman from investigating any conduct by particular public authorities. Other exclusions stop the NSW Ombudsman from investigating some conduct, of some public authorities, in some circumstances. 
The exclusions are complex. It is better to lodge your complaint and let the NSW Ombudsman assess if they can or cannot act, than to wrongly assuming the NSW Ombudsman cannot help.
Below are some of the more common exclusions, they include the conduct of: 
• NSW government ministers
• Courts and people associated with a court 
• The NSW Police Force and its members
• The Law Enforcement Conduct Commission 
• The ICAC
• The Attorney-General, Solicitor General or the Director of Public Prosecution relating to the commencement, carrying on or termination of court proceedings
• The Office of the Legal Services Commissioner when handling complaints about legal services
• Any public authority relating to an alleged breach of someone’s privacy

The NSW Ombudsman is also prevented from investigating complaints about local councils if you have a legislated right of appeal or review that you can exercise. This includes complaints about local councils refusing applications for development approval. Or complaints about fines or Orders issued by a council officer. These decisions can be appealed in court. The NSW Ombudsman can only act on these types of complaints if there are special circumstances that make it unreasonable to expect someone to exercise their right of appeal or review.3 
The NSW Ombudsman cannot act on complaints about the Judicial Commission.4
The NSW Ombudsman cannot investigate the conduct or decisions of public authorities relating to applications to access information held be a government body.5 For example, the NSW Ombudsman cannot investigate a decision of a public authority to impose a charge for processing an access to information application, or deciding that an access to information application is not valid. 
Exercise of discretion

The NSW Ombudsman does not have to investigate every complaint it receives. When deciding whether to investigate, the NSW Ombudsman can consider any matters it considers appropriate or relevant.6 Some of the factors that will commonly be consider include:
• Whether you have already tried to resolve the problem directly with the public authority or community service provider you have been dealing with.
• How serious the problem is, and whether it impacts anyone else.
• Whether your complaint is about a commercial or trading issue. For example, a complaint about the terms and conditions for using public transport. 
• How long ago the problem happened. The NSW Ombudsman will not usually act on complaints about things that happened more than 12 months ago.
• Whether there is another satisfactory way for you to resolve your complaint. For example, complaints about the medical care you received at a public hospital would be more appropriately handled by the Health Care Complaints Commission because it specialises in health-related complaints.
If the NSW Ombudsman decides not to investigate your complaint you will be told the reasons for that decision.


Step 3: Who can you make a complaint against? 


The NSW Ombudsman deals with complaints about the administrative conduct of most NSW public authorities and some community service providers.

Respondent
Description
NSW Departments and Authorities

There are many NSW departments and authorities including but not limited to: DCJ Housing, Service NSW, Revenue NSW, Transport for NSW, TAFE NSW, the Department of Education, public universities, NSW Trustee and Guardian, the Office of Liquor and Gaming and, the Health Care Complaints Commission, the Office of Local Government.

Local Government authorities  
Local councils. You can find a directory of all NSW local councils here.
Corrective Services
Public and private Correctional Centres and Youth Justice Centres. Corrective Services NSW including Community Corrections officers (also known as parole or probation officers) and Justice Health.
Community Service Providers 
The Department of Communities and Justice (DCJ) and non-government organisation that are funded, licensed or authorised by DCJ to provide child protection, family support, community inclusion or specialist homelessness services.
A list of community service providers that are funded by DCJ can be found in Volume 3 of the DCJ annual report.
Services for Aboriginal people
Aboriginal Housing Office, Aboriginal Land Councils, the Office of the Registrar, Aboriginal Land Rights Act

Exclusions
The NSW Ombudsman cannot investigate complaint about Members of Parliament, the NSW Police, the LECC, the ICAC, courts and people associated with courts. 
The NSW Ombudsman can also only investigate the conduct of other public authorities in some circumstances.
For more information, please refer to the Exclusion section in Step 2. 
Additional information you need to know
If you are not sure if your complaint is within the jurisdiction of the NSW Ombudsman you can discuss your situation with the office’s Assessments Unit by calling 1800 451 524 Monday to Friday, between 9am and 4pm.
More information about the types of complaints the NSW Ombudsman can and cannot handle can also be found on their website: Complaints we handle - NSW Ombudsman
Step 4: Are you eligible to make a complaint? 
Eligibility
Description
Who can make a complaint?
Anyone can make a complaint to the NSW Ombudsman. 

Have you tried to resolve your complaint directly with the public authority or community service provider? 
NSW Ombudsman believes it is usually appropriate for a public authority or community service provider to have the opportunity to address a complaint directly, before they will consider getting involved. If you have not taken this step the NSW Ombudsman may decline to act on your complaint.

Complaints that are urgent or involve safety or wellbeing risks may not need to be raised with the public authority or community service provider first. 
Can a complaint be made on behalf of someone? 
You can make a complaint on someone’s behalf. However, unless you have their consent, for privacy reasons the NSW Ombudsman may be limited in what information they can provide to you.  
You can ask someone such as a friend, family member, advocate or member or parliament to make a complaint on your behalf. You may need to confirm that you have consented to the complaint being made on your behalf.
Exclusions

You can lodge a complaint with the NSW Ombudsman at any time, however, there are some limitations if the conduct occurred before to 1976. Please see Step 2 “Time Limitations” for more information. 
Additional information you need to know
The NSW Ombudsman’s services are free. You do not need a lawyer for the complaint process, but you can seek legal advice at any time.
Under the Ombudsman Act 1974 it is an indictable offence for anyone to hurt or disadvantage you for making a complaint to the NSW Ombudsman.
Current and former public officials who make a complaint may also have additional protections from detrimental action under the Public Interest Disclosures Act 2022.
