
Registrar of Community Housing NSW 

In this fact sheet, we introduce the Registrar of Community Housing NSW (the Registrar). We outline how complaints can be made by a tenant, or a person authorised to act on behalf of a tenant, to the Registrar. 
The Registrar of Community Housing NSW is an independent statutory officer that is responsible for registering, monitoring and regulating community housing providers in New South Wales under the National Regulatory System for Community Housing (NRSCH) and the New South Wales Local Scheme. The Registrar of Community Housing NSW reports to the Minister for Housing who administers the Community Housing Providers (Adoption of National Law) Act 2012 (NSW), and is responsible for the implementation of the NRSCH. 
The Registrar of Community Housing NSW can only assist with complaints or issues in relation to a community housing provider that is registered in NSW under the NRSCH or the NSW Local Scheme, and the community housing provider's compliance with the Community Providers National Law (NSW) (National Law).
Legislation and Key Terms
Relevant Legislation: [List any pieces of legislation that are relevant to the work of the complaint body. Include a link to the legislation.] Example:
• Community Housing Providers (Adoption of National Law) Act 2012 (NSW),
Key terms: [Identify, list in alphabetical order, and define in accessible language any key terms that will be referred to throughout the factsheet.] Example:
Complaint: An expression of dissatisfaction where a response or resolution is wanted, expected or required.
Complainant: A person who has made a complaint.


Step 1: What type of Complaints can be made to this body? 
Community housing provider complaints
The Registrar of Community Housing NSW manages enquiries and complaints in respect of community housing providers that are registered under the NRSCH in NSW or NSW Local Scheme.
Category
Example
Compliance with the NRSCH
Complaints can be made to the Registrar in relation to issues or concerns with respect to community housing providers that are registered under the NRSCH in NSW, including to determine whether the providers are meeting their obligations under, and complying with, the NRSCH1 and the National Law.
You can check whether your housing provider is registered under the NRSCH here.
For example, the Registrar can hear complaints in respect of a NRSCH registered community housing provider where there are concerns that it has not been fair, transparent and responsive in delivering housing assistance to tenants, residents and other clients in contravention of section 1 of the National Regulatory Code.2 
Compliance with NSW Local Scheme
Complaints can be made to the Registrar in relation to issues or concerns with respect to community housing providers that are registered under the NSW Local Scheme, including to determine whether the providers are complying with the Community Housing Providers (Adoption of National Law) Act 2012 (NSW), as well as the NSW Local Scheme Regulatory Framework underpinned by the principles of the National Law. 
Complaints can be made by tenants, registered providers, neighbours and other stakeholders or third parties.
Tenants
If tenants have raised issues, concerns or complaints with the community housing providers directly and believe that the provider has not followed their internal policies and procedures, or where there is significant non-compliance with the regulatory framework, the tenants can make a complaint to the Registrar. 
Registered providers
The Registrar can deal with complaints from registered community housing providers in respect of systemic business failures, inappropriate corporate activities, misallocation of government funding, undesirable tenancy or maintenance practices, and allegations of fraud or corruption.3
Neighbours/other stakeholders
The Registrar can handle neighbourhood or third-party complaints relating to community housing provider's compliance with the National Law, and can assist in identifying if a particular property is a community housing property. 
Additional Information

The Registrar does not provide accommodation and is unable to assist with accommodation requests. If you have an accommodation request, you should contact Housing NSW.
The Registrar does not have power to resolve disputes between individual tenants and their providers, including in respect of:
• Termination of the tenancy agreement
• Breach of the agreement, such as rent arrears
• Disputes related to tenancy transfers
• Shared facilities charges
• Payments of debts
• Repairs and maintenance
• Rents and rent increases
• Disputes between tenants.4
If you have one of the above disputes, it is best to contact the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal. 
The Registrar cannot assist with appeals from decisions by registered community housing providers in respect of an individual's eligibility for, priority or entitlement to community housing. These decisions need to be appealed through the Housing Appeals Committee.
The Registrar cannot assist in neighbourhood disputes or in matters which fall outside the NSW Local Scheme and cannot investigate complaints by neighbours of properties managed by registered community housing providers unless the complaints raise issues about the providers' compliance with the regulatory framework.5 For example, the Registrar cannot assist in matters relating to private or public rental properties, matters managed by local councils, fencing and boundary disputes, social amenity issues such as problem pets, pests, or health issues, or anti-social behaviour.

Step 2: What is the Jurisdiction of the complaints body? (General Jurisdiction)
Jurisdiction
Description
State: New South Wales

This complaints body has powers to hear complaints under the law of New South Wales. 
Section 10(1)(e) of the National Law (Appendix to Community Housing Providers (Adoption of National Law) Act 2012 (NSW)) gives the Registrar power "to investigate complaints about the compliance of registered community housing providers with community housing legislation" .6
Geographical Scope

The Registrar can receive enquiries and complaints in respect of any community housing provider registered under the NRSCH in New South Wales and community housing providers registered under the NSW Local Scheme. 
If you are outside of New South Wales, you will need to contact the Registrar of Community Housing for your State.
Time Limitations

The National Law does not provide a time limitation for your complaint.
Exclusions

If your complaint does not relate to a registered community housing provider in NSW, you cannot make a complaint to the Registrar of Community Housing NSW.
It should be noted that the legislation gives the Registrar a regulatory role, but does not provide the Registrar with a complaint resolution role.7
Additional information you need to know
It is important to consider if the Registrar of Community Housing NSW is the right complaints body for your concern. As noted above, the Registrar can only deal with complaints about a registered community housing provider that is not complying with the NRSCH, the National Law or the National Regulatory Code.


Step 3: Who can you make a complaint against? (Jurisdiction: Type of Respondents)
Respondent
Description
Registered Community Housing Providers
The Registrar for Community Housing NSW can only hear complaints in respect of community housing providers that are registered under the NRSCH in NSW or the NSW Local Scheme.
You can check whether your housing provider is registered under the NRSCH here.
Exclusions

If you want to make a complaint in respect of a housing request, you will need to contact the Housing Appeals Committee.
If you want to make a complaint in respect of your tenancy for a non-registered community housing provider, you will need to contact the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal.

Step 4: Are you eligible to make a complaint? (Jurisdiction: Complainant’s Eligibility)
Eligibility
Description
Tenants
Current, previous or prospective tenants of a registered NSW Community Housing Provider can make a complaint.
Can a complaint be made on someone’s behalf
Complaints can be made on someone’s behalf with their authority.
Pre-requisite steps

You should first raise the concern with the registered community housing provider directly. If you are not satisfied with the result, you will need to make a formal complaint to the registered community housing provider, via the registered community housing provider's formal complaint and handling process.  
The registered community housing provider should then progress the matter in accordance with its policies. 
If the complaint is not resolved satisfactorily, you can raise the complaint with the Registrar of Community Housing NSW.
Time Limits
There are no time limits for making a complaint.
Exclusions
You are not eligible to make a complaint to the Registrar of Community Housing NSW if your community housing provider is not registered under the NRSCH in NSW or the NSW Local Scheme.
