SafeWork NSW 

In this fact sheet, we introduce SafeWork NSW (SafeWork). We outline how complaints can be made by someone to SafeWork.  

SafeWork is the workplace health and safety (WHS) regulator in NSW. They work with the NSW community to reduce work-related injuries and illnesses and make it safer to do business. SafeWork's main functions, as defined by the NSW Work Health and Safety Act 2011 (s 152) (the Act), include: 

• Monitor and ensure compliance with the Act. 
• Provide advice, information, and education on safety matters. 
• Conduct and defend legal proceedings related to the Act in court or tribunal. 

 
 
Legislation and Key Terms 
Relevant Legislation: 

• Work Health and Safety Act 2011 (NSW) 
 
Key terms:  

Alternative Dispute Resolution Mechanisms: Methods other than court proceedings used to resolve disputes, such as mediation or negotiation. 

Complaint: An expression of dissatisfaction where a response or resolution is wanted, expected or required. 

Complainant: A person who has made a complaint. 

Compliance Notices: Notices issued by inspectors specifying actions to rectify WHS (Work Health and Safety) breaches. 

Enforceable Undertakings: Agreed-upon actions that must be taken to rectify WHS breaches, which are legally binding. 

External Review/Remedies: Options available to complainants who remain dissatisfied with the outcome of their complaint, including external review processes or pursuing legal action. 

Improvement Notices: Notices issued for non-compliance with WHS laws that pose a risk to health and safety, requiring corrective actions within a set period. 

Injunctions: Court orders sought by SafeWork NSW to halt unsafe work practices or conditions, especially when immediate action is necessary to protect workers' safety. 

Internal Review Opportunities: A process offered by SafeWork NSW for complainants who are dissatisfied with the outcome of their complaint or the actions taken, involving a review within the organization. 

Prohibition Notices: Notices issued by inspectors when they identify imminent risks to health and safety, requiring the cessation of specific activities or operations until the safety issue is resolved. 

Step 1: What type of Complaints can be made to this body?  
 
Workplace obligations 
SafeWork is responsible for educating, ensuring compliance with and, enforcing work health and safety legislation in NSW. The below list are things employers and businesses must do to comply with health and safety laws. You can complain to SafeWork if your workplace does not have these in place.   
 
Sub-category 
Example  
First Aid Plan
All workplaces must have and provide access to first aid equipment, facilities and in come circumstances, trained first aiders. 

Example: Jamie cut his hand when getting a cup of tea in his work kitchen. He went to get a band-aid but the first aid kit was locked. He asked his boss for the key but was told it had been lost a few months ago and they hadn’t gotten around to getting a new one. 
Emergency plan
All workplaces are required to have an emergency plan in case a situation arises such as a fire, explosion, chemical spill, natural disaster or violence.

Example: The fire alarm went off at Kerry’s workplace. Kerry works on level 26 of a tall building. She asked what they were meant to do, were they meant to evacuate? No one knew or remember ever being trained on an emergency procedure.
“If you get injured at work” poster
Every employer must have the “if you get injured at work poster” in some prominent place at their work.
Health and Safety training
Employers are responsible for ensuring their workers are properly instructed and trained on how to do their work safely, including any risks and how they can be controlled. Training should be easy to understand, even for those whose first language is not English or who have additional literacy or hearing needs.

Example: Once a year at Tony’s work they have a big meeting with all the staff to train them about health and safety. They hold the meeting in a large hall and the boss stands up front and talks for 15 minutes. He never uses a microphone so anyone standing up the back can’t hear what is being said.
Injury register and mandatory reporting 
Workplaces are required to register any workplace injuries and illnesses sustained by workers or visitors, regardless of whether an insurance claim has or will been made. 

Serious injuries, illness, death or a potentially dangerous incident must be reported to SafeWork immediately.  
Workers compensation insurance and return to work policy
It is compulsory for employers to have workers compensation insurance policy and a return to work program unless they:

• Pay $7,500 or less in wages during a financial year; and
•  Do not employ an apprentice or trainee, and
• Are not a member of a related business in a group for premium purposes, and
• Are not involved in taxi or hire car driving, horse racing or professional boxing.

Control measures to eliminate or minimise psychosocial risks
Workplaces must eliminate, or if that is not reasonably practicable minimise psychosocial hazards including bullying and harassment, including sexual harassment. Psychosocial hazards can also include role overload, exposure to traumatic events, poor support and inadequate reward or recognition.

Example: Julie has a colleague, Jason, who keeps making sexual comments about her appearance and dress. She has seen him doing to other people too. She told her boss that it is making everyone uncomfortable and scared to work alone with Jason. Her boss says there is nothing they can do about it and Julie should just ignore him. 
 
 
Step 2: What is the Jurisdiction of the complaints body?  
Jurisdiction 
Description 
State 
 
SafeWork NSW has powers to hear complaints under the law of New South Wales. 
 
 
Geographical Scope 
 
SafeWork NSW is responsible for enforcing WHS laws and regulations, conducting inspections and investigations, and providing guidance and support to businesses and workers operating within NSW. It’s jurisdiction and authorities does not extend beyond the borders of NSW. 
Time Limitations 
 
SafeWork NSW does not impose strict time limitations for making complaints related to workplace safety issues. However, it is generally advisable to report safety concerns as soon as possible to ensure timely investigation and resolution of the issue.  
Exclusions 
 
SafeWork NSW does not have specific mandatory exclusions listed in its jurisdiction related to individuals lodging complaints elsewhere or pursuing related court proceedings. However, there are considerations and factors that may impact the jurisdiction of SafeWork NSW and the handling of complaints. For example, employment disputes that do not directly involve safety concerns may not be considered.  
Exercise of discretion  
SafeWork NSW can carry out legal prosecutions against anyone who has breached WHS laws. This is a discretionary action and is only carried out where it is in the public interest. 
 
Step 3: Who can you make a complaint against? 
Respondent 
Description 
Employers and Businesses 
Complaints can be made about employers and businesses operating within NSW, regardless of whether they are registered with a particular authority. They must have a presence or activities in NSW that relate to WHS issues. 
Employees and Workers 
 
Complaints may involve concerns related to the actions or conduct of employees or workers. These individuals must be employed or engaged in work within NSW. 
Contractors and Subcontractors 
Complaints can be made about contractors and subcontractors who are performing work in NSW, especially if their activities have WHS implications. 
Workplaces 
Complaints related to unsafe work conditions or practices within specific workplaces in NSW can be lodged. The location of the workplace is key 
Supervisors and Managers 
Complaints may involve the actions or decisions of supervisors and managers in NSW workplaces. 
Training Providers 
Complaints about WHS training providers in NSW can be lodged if there are concerns about the quality or effectiveness of their training programs. 
Government Agencies 
In some cases, complaints may involve government agencies or departments within NSW when their actions or decisions impact workplace health and safety. 
Exclusions 
 
Any non-workplace matters or entities outside of the jurisdiction of NSW. 
 
Step 4: Are you eligible to make a complaint? 
Eligibility 
Description 
Who can make a complaint? 
Anyone who is currently engaged in work within NSW can make a complaint. 
Pre-requisite steps 
 
Before raising a workplace health or safety issue with us, constructive steps should be taken to have a safety issue resolved in the workplace. 
These steps may include: 
• reporting the issue verbally to your supervisor or manager 
• reporting the issue through the workplace's hazard reporting procedures 
• raising the issue with the health and safety representative 
• raising the issue with management through your union representative 
Can complaints be made on behalf of someone? 
 
Yes, with the person’s consent or authorisation to act on their behalf, a third-party or representative complaint can be made. Some common scenarios include: 
• Family members 
• Legal Representatives 
• Health and Safety Representatives (HSRs) 
• Trade Unions and Employee Associations 
• Advocacy Organisations 
